## Scripts for the paper from D. Lu, H.S. Sin, C. Lu and M. T. Fuller (GEO: GSE145975)

UCSC public session: https://genome.ucsc.edu/s/danrlu/Fuller_paper

### == tutorials on how to reproduce the data pre-processing from the paper

  - I'm keeping the scripts as they are for record keeping, despite the following caveats:

  - ... in several steps unzipping/writing out intermediate files was not necessary. I did it to make sure the intermediates were what I thought they were, but they consumes storage space.
  
  - ... our high performance computing cluster upgraded from SGE to SLURM somewhere in the middle of analysis so it's a mix of job script format.  
  
  - ... normalization for bigwig in ATAC-seq and CAGE used 10x of RPM instead of RPM to avoid data range smaller than 1.
  
**Data** contains the gene lists and associated .bed files for CAGE clusters.

**1.sequencing_data_processing (Bash)** includes scripts that process raw sequencing data (RNA-seq, ATAC-seq, CAGE) to (a) files for viewing in genomic browser, and (b) raw read counts to downstream analysis. 

**2.Differential_experssion_analysis (R)** includes scripts that normalize read counts across samples and do differential expression. 

**3.data_integrative_analysis (R)** includes scripts that integrates all available data to define gene groups and assing CAGE clusters to genes. 


### == Method section that was left out in the main text:

**Short promoter reporter generation and analysis**

tTAF reporter constructs were generated in two steps. EGFP coding sequences were first inserted into AscI site of pFAF (Chen X and Fisher JA Plasmid 47,61–65 (2002)). Short promoters sequences of tTAF genes were then PCR amplified and inserted into SacII and AscI sites of the resulting plasmid, replacing all faf regulatory sequences. Reporter flies were generated by introducing the corresponding reporter plasmids into y1w1118 flies via P-element mediated germline transformation. more than 3 reporters fly strains were examined for cell type specific reporter expression.
