## ATAC-seq

Libraries made with Nextera kit (Illumina FC-121-1030 discontinued. Ask local sales rep for stand alone transposase). all 75bp paired-end sequenced on HiSeq 4000

 
#### 1. quality control on raw sequencing data
```bash
qsub Run01FastQC.sh
```


#### 2. trim off adaptors
```bash
qsub Run02Trim_PE.sh 
```


#### 3. BWA paired-end map to genome
```bash
qsub Run03BWAsrt_PE.sh 
```


#### 4. remove PCR duplicates. For read pairs that both read1 and read2 map to the same genomic location, only keep one of them.
```bash
qsub Run04RmDup_PE.sh 
```


#### 5. filter and adjust reads to reflect the transposase digestion site
only keep reads that have MAPQ bigger or equal to 20 (for BWA, that is 1 in 100 error rate, and multimapper whose MAPQ is 0 will be removed), and map to the main chromosomes (to keep the analysis simple)

convert bam to bed format, and call adjust_bed.py to keep only the first 9bp of each read (for both ends of the read pairs), which corresponds to the stretch of DNA that the Tn5 transposase binds and therefore is accessible. 
```bash
qsub Run05Filter_B2B_AdjBed_Q20.sh
```


#### 6. mapping statistics. 
these operates on the .bam files to see mapping metrics. the size metrics should show periodicity of fragment size that correspond to fragments that enclose no nucleosome, 1 nucleosome, 2 nucleosomes etc. This correlates with quality of ATAC-seq library.
```bash
qsub Run05IdxStats_PE.sh
qsub Run06Flagstat_Q20_PE.sh
qsub Run06SizeMetrics_PE.sh
```


## below are combining all replicates:

=====================
#### 7. for viewing in genomic browser
#### 7.1 combine the adjusted .bed file 
for replicates of the same condition into 1 bed file
```bash
qsub Run07merge_adj.bed.sh
```


7.2 convert .bed to .bedgraph which is needed to convert to .bigwig for genomic viewer viewing. during conversion to .bedgraph, each library is normalized by total read counts. Note the reads at this step is filtered by deplicate, MAPQ and on main chromasomes. 
```bash
qsub Run07BedtoBGraphtoBW_Q20.sh
```

=====================
#### 8. for peak calling
#### 8.1 combine the .bam files 
merge replicates of the same condition into 1 .bam file
```bash
qsub Run08merge_bam.sh
```


#### 8.2 MACS 
for paired-end reads, MACS2 only use read1 for peak calling, so calling peaks with the .bam file will miss half of the data. However for .bed files, MACS2 do not identify read pairs and will therefore use all reads for peak calling. So convert .bam to .bed first.

for ATAC-seq, if using the original .bam or .bed file that contains the entire reads, `--nomodel --shift -50 --extsize 100` will use the 5' end of reads to build pileup and call peaks. Alternatively, if using the adjusted.bed which only contains the 5' end, should do `--nomodel --shift 0 --extsize 9` the 9 here is consider the 9bp binding site of transposase all accessible.
```bash
qsub Run08MACS_no_ctrl.sh
```

=====================
#### 9. for nucleosome calling. 
NucleoATAC needs 2 input files: (1) open chromatin regions to call nucleosomes. This is obtained by extending the BROAD peaks generated by MACS2 by like 200bp (2) The .bam files. This step needs more reads than identifying open chromatin, so used the .bam file comtaining all replicates for each condition.


#### 9.1 obtain open chromatin regions
MACS2 call broad peaks. For historical reason, this step was done on individual replicates. 
```bash
qsub Run09MACS_no_ctrl_broad.sh
```

Then extend the peak regions by 200bp on both sides. This could create regions that overlap with each other, so need to do `bedtools merge` in the end
```bash
qsub Run09individual_slop_merge.sh
```

Merge replicates
```bash
qsub Run09merge_broadpeaks.sh
```

#### 9.2 call nucleosome positions
```bash
qsub Run09NATAC_array.sh
```

----
last used 12/12/2017 on SGE with

gcc/5.2.0

fastqc/0.11.2

trim_galore/0.4.1

perl-scg/5.24.0

cutadapt/1.8.1(default)

python/2.7(default)

bwa/0.7.10

Picard/1.130

samtools/1.5

bedtools/2.25.0

sambamba/0.6.6

MACS2/2.1.1

nucleoatac/0.3.2
